in the future humanity is preparing to
launch an attack on the homeworld of an
alien race
called the formics that had attacked
earth and killed millions
the formic invasion was stopped by maser
rackham who crashed his fighter plane
into the formic queenship at the
apparent cost of his life
over the course of 50 years gifted
children are trained by the
international fleet to become commanders
of a new fleet for this counter-attack
cadet andrew ender wiggin draws the
attention of colonel hiram groff and maj
gwen anderson because of his aptitude in
simulated space combat
they order the removal of his monitor
signifying the end of the cadet program
ender is attacked by stilson a less
prudent student he defeated in the
combat sim
but ender fights back and severely
injures him
ender confesses his grief to his older
sister valentine
but is harassed further by their older
brother peter
groff arrives to reveal ender was being
tested and is still part of the
programme
gruff brings ender to battle school and
places ender with other cadets his age
but treats him as extraordinary thereby
subjecting him to being ostracized by
the others
the cadets are placed in squads and
perform training games in a zero-gravity
battle room
ender quickly adapts to the games
devising new strategies older students
have not yet seen
groff reassigns ender to salamander army
led by commander bonzo madrid
bonzo believing that ender is inept due
to his size and fearing ender will cause
the squad to fail
prevents him from training with the rest
of the squad
another cadet petra arcanian takes ender
under her wing and trains him privately
bonzo becomes aware of this but does not
take any action besides ordering ender
not to train with petra
ender secretly persuades bonzo to let
him continue
arguing this will increase ender's
chance of being accepted into another
squad
in the next match bonzo orders ender to
do nothing while the rest of the
salamander army fights another team
however seeing the team losing and petra
in trouble
ender comes to her aid and helps the
salamander army win
after the match bonzo is humiliated and
threatens to kill ender if he
embarrasses him again
meanwhile ender plays a computerized
mind game set in a fantasy world
which presents difficult choices to the
player
in one situation ender creates an
outside-the-box solution to overcome a
seemingly unsolvable problem
later he encounters a formic in the game
and then a simulated image of valentine
entering the ruins of a castle
inside he finds another image of
valentine but as he nears
it turns into an image of peter who
grabs ander and looks into his right eye
before the game ends
these are noted as unusual additions to
the game which is seemingly being
altered by ender's interaction with the
computer
gruff promotes ender to lead his own
squad which is made up of students who
have gained ender's trust
they are put in increasingly difficult
battles
in a surprise match against two other
teams including bonzo's salamander army
ender devises a novel strategy of
sacrificing part of his team to achieve
a goal
impressing graf bonzo attacks ender in
the bathroom after the match
but ender fights back bonzo falls during
the struggle and is seriously injured
distraught ender prepares to quit battle
school but groff has valentine convince
him to continue
gruff takes ender to humanity's forward
base on a former formic planet near
their homeworld
there ender meets mazer rackham who did
not die as had been previously believed
rackham explains how he spotted the
shared mind nature of the formics to
stop the attack 50 years prior
ender finds that his former squad
members are also there to help him train
in computerized simulations of large
fleet combat
rackham puts special emphasis on the
fleet's molecular detachment
md device that is capable of
disintegrating matter note one ender's
training is rigorous
and anderson expresses concern over this
but groff notes they have run out of
time to replace endure
ender's final test is monitored by
several fleet commanders
as the simulation starts ender finds his
fleet over the formic home world
vastly outnumbered he orders most of his
fleet to sacrifice themselves to protect
the md long enough to fire on the
homeworld
the resulting chain reaction burns over
the surface of the planet
killing the entire population the
simulation ends
and ender believes the test is over the
commanders restart the video screens
showing that the destruction of the
formic homeworld was real
and revealing that ender has been
controlling the real fleet in this and
all previous simulations
despite graff's assurance that he is a
hero ender is horrified and
outraged at the annihilation of an
entire race and believes he will be
remembered as a killer
as ender struggles with his emotions
during sleep he recognizes one of the
formic structures nearby as being
similar to the ruined castle from the
game
believing it is trying to communicate
with him ender goes to it
he follows the path shown by the game
and encounters a dying formic queen
the queen acknowledges ender's role in
the genocide and moves to kill him
but when ender shows remorse she spares
his life
it is determined that the formic were
only seeking a source of water and did
not want conflict
the queen gives ender a queen egg that
she has been protecting
with the war ended ender is promoted to
admiral
given a small ship and left to his own
devices
in a letter to valentine he confides
that he is going into deep space
determined to start a new formic colony
with the queen egg